This is testing, testing on Tuesday, July the 3rd.
Testing, testing.
This is Tom Darling, July the 3rd, 2001.
It is July 3 and we're in room 207 of the Evans Library and I have the pleasure and honor again of chatting with Major General Thomas G. Darling.
and today we're chatting about his experiences when he came back to Texas A&M as the Commandant of the Corps of Cadets.
Describe your experience between graduation from A&M and coming back to be Commandant.
That was a period of 33 years.
I went into the Air Force in July after graduating in May 1954.
Again, not expecting to stay for a career, but that's the way it turned out.
But I spent 33 years and served in numerous places and went through flying school and flew in SAC for a number of years and later was in command and staff assignments, which included one tour as Commandant of the Armed Forces Staff College at Norfolk, Virginia, which was a very delightful assignment.
choice times in the military working with essentially it was a college president in military terms, but I had responsibility for the curriculum and budget and everything associated with the university or with that school.
The only thing we didn't
We were funded through the federal government and hosted by the Navy there, but I'll cut it short there unless you have further questions.
On that, you had, I'll bet, as fine of students as any institution ever in terms of their ability and their zeal and their effort.
That is absolutely correct.
It was called a mid-career professional school.
We had majors and lieutenant colonels or
Commanders, Lieutenant Commanders from the Navy, all services.
Some of the civilian institutions sent people like the CIA and others, sent a few students to have a real mixed group of people there.
And our students, most of them had master's degrees.
Some of them had PhDs already.
A few of them only had bachelor's, but most of them had master's degree and they were considered generally in the top 10% of their service.
rising stars in the military, and it's been my pleasure to watch a number of those progress since then.
All right.
Then after that, then where?
From that, I went out to California to be the vice commander of 15th Air Force, which was essentially the western half of the United States, all the SAC forces there, including bombers, tankers, ICBMs, and all of those forces.
And it was there in California in May of
1985, I had received orders to return to Norfolk to be the deputy commander of the Atlantic Command, which is a big, one of the big area commands.
All the Atlantic, the literal countries, was our area of responsibility, but I was the first Air Force officer to be the vice commander, the deputy commander of what was one of the large unified commands, which was primarily naval.
But again, this idea of jointness was very prevalent and they wanted someone from another service there.
So I ended up there my last year in the military.
But it was just prior to my leaving California that I received this letter out of the blue from a fellow named John Coldus.
This was in May of 85, I believe, and he told me that A&M was doing a search to find a new commandant.
They wanted a general officer and
preferably someone had been in the Corps of Cadets at A&M, a graduate, and wanted to know if I was interested.
This was a letter that came out of the blue to me and that really started our negotiation.
I wrote him back and told him that I was flattered to even be asked to consider this position but that I wouldn't be able to be a candidate because I had just received orders to go to Norfolk to this Atlantic Command job and
I thought it was a good career step for me and I wouldn't even be eligible for retirement until I'd been in place for at least a year.
That was the rule.
Once they move you, they want to get one year out of you anyway.
And I had a couple more years to, three more years in fact, to do before mandatory retirement from the military.
So I was looking forward to this assignment.
I thought it was a good
good opportunity for me to be in this command.
And I thanked him and he writes me back and says, well, we're going to take some time doing this.
You know, it may be a year or more before we select someone.
So we'd still like to consider you a candidate.
And I said, fine, that'll be fine.
And so I went on to Norfolk and assumed this position there.
There was a four-star admiral was my boss there.
Admiral Lee Baggett, he was a Naval Academy graduate, a very bright man.
I enjoyed working for him.
He kind of took me under his wing knowing that I was not all that versed in naval things.
But we did have Air Force assets and Army assets within the command.
So there was a need for someone from another service.
But I had a busy one year there working under him.
He would take off around the world.
He was a NATO commander and he'd have to go to the NATO meetings in Europe and leave me in charge of this thing.
I never will forget the one Sunday afternoon I'd gone out to the golf course.
He was away and I was in charge and I had this big brick on my hip and decided to go out and play a little golf there.
I was reachable through the radio when
Lo and behold, a mid-afternoon I get this call about the USS Stark being hit, which was a ship that came, I believe, out of our command to furnish.
So there I was dealing with this major national event and working rules of engagement in the succeeding days and weeks.
And this was a major national issue and all of that.
I remember one of the US, the Russian submarine sank one day again when he was away and I was in charge of that.
That was in the Atlantic that that submarine sank and created a national incident and a lot of things that came out of that.
But I also gave tours on ships when we'd have
Dignitaries visiting, he'd frequently send me to kind of lead the tour of the ship.
So I thought it was a little strange that an Air Force guy here is leading a ship on the USS Rickover.
I was leading a tour that day on the Rickover that he died.
I never will forget that.
While we were there, they announced that he had passed away.
But I heard a lot of Rickover stories over the years.
A very interesting experience.
One other thing there, in the springtime, early that year, the Admiral had to make a trip to the Pacific, and he had some commitments out there that he felt compelled to make, but about that time he gets a notice from Washington that he is asked to testify before the readiness committee of the Senate on the readiness and sustainability of the command.
Well, to my surprise, Admiral Baggett told me, he says, I've got this other thing.
You're going to have to go testify before this Senate committee.
Well, I had not testified before a committee like that in any jobs that I'd had to that point.
But for two weeks, I immersed myself for 24 hours a day almost getting ready for this Senate hearing.
And the Admiral from Sister Command in the Pacific, the Pacific Command, two-star Admiral came, and he and I together sat there and testified in the Rayburn building, I guess it was that day, but quite an experience.
Some of the big-name senators, Senator Levin, who's now still a big gun in the Senate, was one of them.
He was kind to us that day, but anyway, that all went very well, but
When you're dealing with something you're not the foremost authority in and you're going to have to testify before Congress, it causes you to do a lot of homework.
Then you hear back from A&M.
Okay.
John Colas did write me back and say they'd like to count me as a candidate.
And I agreed to that.
And then during the fall of...
86 it is, I'm talking 86.
John flew up to Norfolk to visit me.
We had dinner together and he discussed the job in great detail.
Had you met him before that personally?
I had met him previously.
I had been a reviewing officer one weekend for a football game about 79 or something like that.
I'd met him briefly.
I couldn't say that I knew him personally or anything.
I'd met him, but I did not know him really.
What were your first impressions of him?
Well, I thought he was a very...
warm, friendly person, very control of himself, kind, thoughtful, considerate, compassionate.
The more I visited with him, the more he seemed to fit all those things.
But I judged him a little different to what I thought he might be, you know, not knowing him.
Very, very gentle, very kind, very thoughtful, very knowing kind of person.
Did he give you greater insight to the search and what was going on?
Oh, he gave me some insight.
He didn't reveal all the information to me, but he told me they had several candidates and they wanted to narrow them down, I think, to four and maybe bring them down to the campus.
Later I found that's kind of the typical, or say three or four, and have them come down to the campus.
He didn't tell me who the other folks were or anything, but we just had a good visit.
He wanted to know my philosophy about things, how I viewed things, what was my leadership style and on and on.
He delved into all of that.
Sounds like good questions, appropriate questions.
He did tell me, you know, some of the background about the job, a little bit why they were looking for a general officer.
Because they'd never had a general officer before as commandant of the Corps of Cadets.
And up until that time, or for several years, the Army colonel that headed Army ROTC had also been doubling as the commandant of cadets.
And he explained to me we had the death here in 84 of the cadet on the night march, which generated great adverse publicity and heartache.
And he explained to me that it was rather difficult to hold.
He didn't say this in these words, but this is what came through to me.
you know, he was not really accountable to the university administration in the purest, strictest sense.
You know, he was here on loan from the Army.
So I got the idea they wanted a person who would be responsible and accountable to the university, and I think that's probably a good decision.
On hindsight, I think it's the way it ought to be.
That's the way most schools have gone.
They still have these core programs.
But he explained to me some of the background and
He mentioned to me they had a new hazing law that came into effect, would be in effect that fall, was creating some interest.
But he didn't go into great detail about all that.
When I came here, I'll jump ahead a little bit, it didn't take long to realize that I didn't have a
a very deep appreciation for what all this job entailed.
And there's no way a boss can explain everything about a job.
He didn't try to deceive me.
I think he tried to explain the best he could.
But, you know, just an hour or so interviews, you cannot cover all those things.
The job turned out to be a lot more complex than I ever expected.
But anyway, John invited me to A&M.
My wife and I flew down and spent a weekend.
We went before
a search committee, I guess it was, and we had to meet several different people, and I met a few people at the university while I was here.
I went in to see Dr. Vandiver, and Jerry Gaston had just been named to that associate provost job, I believe it was.
He was just moving into his office over in the Koch building, and they told me, John told me, you need to go over and
meet Jerry Gaston.
I didn't know anything about him but I remember going there and Jerry didn't give me a short shake I wouldn't say I mean for his time and all but clearly his interest was keyed by this new position and just moving in and things unsettled in his office and I was kind of a burden on him I'm afraid at that time but you know I didn't know Jerry or anything but
I met a few people like that while I was here, and it was a very warm visit.
We went to a football game, and we went to John's house after the game and learned how he does all these things on football weekends.
Pretty amazing.
Mary Dell would prepare all this food, and he'd have a house full of people there, very warm and friendly, and a lot of students there, and the interaction I thought was kind of special.
I detected something special about this guy that it sort of surprised me in a way to the degree to which he went out of his way to try to host and welcome and the way he knew students' names and could recall all these things.
Later I learned more about that, but that was my impression.
But we had a very positive visit here over the weekend.
Did the visit in
courage your interest?
It did.
But I still had some mixed feelings about this, knowing I still had at least two and a half more years or so to do in the military, and the opportunity perhaps for additional rank and all there in the position I was in.
I was in a setup where I could have
been promoted or gone to another job even.
It was that kind of a position and a very prestigious position which I felt very fortunate to be in.
So I had some mixed feelings about abandoning that.
I had some reservation about telling the Admiral that I think I may retire and leave
when I hadn't been there too long.
So I still had those mixed feelings.
You know, if the offer comes, it had not come at that point.
But John came back up to Virginia.
Seemed like it was January, February.
Invested me again up there.
We had dinner and all that again and kind of went over some of this.
And he told me there was a hiring freeze on at A&M at that time.
That was when the budget got real tight.
Just certain positions could be filled.
They thought my position was one that they could fill, but it wasn't certain at that time.
So there was some uncertainty in all this because of the hiring freeze.
that had been implemented across the state, I guess.
But anyway, it was still encouraging to me, listening to him, and I was excited about that opportunity, and it wasn't but a few days after that that I received a letter or call or both, I think.
saying, you've been selected.
We'd like you to take this job.
And they wanted you to begin about when?
Well, they said it's summer.
I said, you know, it'd be summer.
It's early.
Summer of 87.
This was early 87 that we were talking, February in that time period.
And I told him it would be summer at the earliest before I could come.
And he said that would be fine.
Earlier he told me that
they were going to take the whole year to do this, that he had put Malin Sutherland in as acting commandant.
Malin was a young fellow that worked for him for a while, and he'd been in other jobs like this.
He'd done a number of things, and he felt Malin could handle it.
He was a former cadet, but we're just going to let it ride this year and let Malin be the interim commandant or acting commandant.
and explained all that, and I didn't really have any fee.
He just informed me of that, and that's the way it worked out.
Malin was the interim, and he told me I could come in summer.
They'd like to have me there whenever I could.
summer would be fine and I again thought briefly I was excited about that thinking this is the only chance that I'll have to go to A&M this job won't be there if I wait one two more years I'd never thought about ending up at A&M in fact I'd considered retiring in Virginia eventually we loved the state of Virginia had a lot of contacts I'd been stationed in Virginia three four different three different times
and had a lot of good close friends, people I'd met through the Staff College in Norfolk and all.
So we kind of thought we might stay there, but this was an opportunity I hadn't expected.
I didn't seek.
And it didn't take me too long to decide that I would accept the position.
And I went in and talked to Admiral Baggett about it.
And he said, Tom, I don't know how you can turn that down.
That's too good an opportunity.
So that was the way it all happened.
I retired there on the first of July and we drove straight to Texas and I was here in College Station about middle of July and really began work officially I think it was before the end of July.
When you arrived, describe how the campus seemed to you compared with what you recall it was when you left.
Physically?
Well, I had been back several times through the year, so it wasn't a total change for me in that my son had attended here in the late 70s, and we'd been down for a football game every few years, and I read the magazines and all, so I kept up with things pretty well.
I'd been a muster speaker in a couple of places and all of that, so it wasn't a total shock to me, but...
Yet it was too.
Guy and Hall gone.
Cebiza was much different.
The dining halls, the process of changing.
The rudder complex, you know, I don't remember anything close to that.
MSC looked pretty much as I remembered it with some growth, but it looked pretty much the same.
The drill field, all of that.
The Bell Tower is a new thing over there.
Kyle Field, much bigger than what I knew.
And then a lot of buildings like Harrington and all of these buildings, all of that was new.
Now, I didn't get over into the academic buildings
to where the academic buildings are very often, but when I did, it was just amazing.
I walk over here today, I'm still amazed at the clustering of buildings on the campus.
And you and your wife, what did you find, where'd you find a place to live?
Well, when we accepted a position down here, my wife flew on down about March to start to look for a house.
and she went around, looked a lot of places, didn't find anything that seemed to fit.
At that time, Southwood Forest was just coming in as the dominant housing area or the most prominent housing area just starting.
Emerald Forest seemed to be the one that was most established and all, but she didn't find anything to her liking.
My brother lives in Houston.
He's
Nagy was an engineer, he runs a millwork business in Houston, and she stayed with them the night before she flew home, my brother and his wife, and talking to them, my brother said, why don't you let me build you a house?
I said, I'll build you a house up there, and I'll save you some money on this.
So we took him up on that offer, and he was our builder.
And he's commuted up here most every day of the week during the construction of the home.
So when we got here in July, the house was within a month of being finished.
It's out in Wood Creek, Wood Creek subdivision, which was pretty new and small at the time.
So we had to kind of commute and stay in a motel for him.
Was this your first?
personally owned home you'd had in a long time?
Or had you lived in quarters?
I'd lived in quarters in the most recent years.
When I was in Omaha, the last time I was there, I was a colonel when I was there, but I made brigadier general while I was there.
And they had a row of old 1896 homes over there on General's Row, and they required all the general officers to live in those quarters because they were on base close and all that.
And we had bought this house and only had it for a year.
And I had to vacate the house and move on base into these generals, the quarters they had for generals there.
Uh-oh.
And that was okay.
We managed to break even on the house, but we'd owned that home.
Let's see, we owned homes in Virginia.
When I first went to Virginia, I went to the Pentagon in 1970, let's see, it'd be 1974.
And we bought a home out in Annandale, Virginia, a new home.
And it was quite the thing in those days.
People would buy homes, especially in Washington, a place like that.
Two or three years later, they'd sell them for a significant profit.
We kept a home three years there and made a good-sized profit.
Those days are long gone, but that was common in those days.
When you got here, describe the staff that you inherited.
Who were the key people?
The key people in the Office of the Commandant were Lieutenant Colonel Don Johnson.
He was the Deputy Commandant.
Lieutenant Colonel Buck Henderson, Don Buck Henderson, was some kind of an assistant commandant title he had.
They were the staff that I had there.
And we had a couple of secretaries, a very small staff.
We did the year before, I believe, take over the housing part of the Corps.
Used to they were under student services under the housing program over there, but just the year before they'd made this split out and gave the commandant responsibility for the Corps housing people.
Of course, we had the band, too.
We had a band director, Joe Haney was the band director.
In fact, when I came down on a visit, I got to meet a lot of people.
One they wanted me to meet was Joe Haney over at the Aggie Band.
Well, I thought that was one of the more interesting meetings I had was with Joe Haney.
And young Jay Brewer was an assistant down with the band, as I recall.
I think he was a captain or a lieutenant, I don't remember.
Now, and these key people, core staff,
So how many of them were active duty personnel and how many were A&M employees?
Well, as far as the staff that I had, these were all A&M people that I'm talking about.
Now, in addition, we had the ROTC departments there, and those people are all assigned by the military services.
About how many?
Well, I'd say about 10 to 15 people for each service.
So about 40 to 45 people collectively in all the services assigned here in the Office of the Commandant.
I need to back up just a little bit.
When John Colis explained this job to me, he told me that it would be a dual position, that they were combining two positions.
One of them would be the head of the School of Military Sciences, plural, Military Sciences, the head of the School of Military Sciences, and the other one would be the Commandant.
And he briefly explained to me that this head of the School of Military Sciences was a job that General Orman Simpson used to hold here at the university, and that that position is responsible for the ROTC
delivery of instruction and those programs and i would report to the provost on that chain and the other chain is commandant i would report to him as vice president for student affairs but he emphasized that in all their meetings and discussions they'd agreed that they were going to combine those two positions general simpson had become a
sort of a quasi-retired advisor and all there.
He still kept off his sum, but he was not in this position.
He was another interesting man I met when I came down for interview and turned out to be one of my closest advisors and mentors.
What a splendid man.
Good man.
But maybe we want to come back to this a little later, but this dual hat thing I had was somewhat awkward and confusing and
Never fully defined.
Been there.
As the 40 to 45 active duty personnel.
That's enlisted people, secretaries and officers.
Each service had about six or seven officers maybe.
And the highest ranking officer in each was a colonel.
And they reported to you
although they were all active duty.
They reported to me as a university, under the university organization.
However, and this is a point of concern, not a point of concern, that's not the right word.
It's a point that
that creates some problems in that the Colonel still owes his primary allegiance to the headquarters that's assigned him here, or to his service.
He's sent here by the Army, the Air Force, the Marine Corps to run a program and to commission officers.
So commissioning officers is their mission here, not training a bunch of cadets over here in the Corps.
and various other kind of things.
But here at the university they did report to me in a loose sense and later I told some of the people when I had thought about all this time that
If you don't write an efficiency report or an annual report on a person, you don't have anything to do with their pay and salary, you don't have a lot of control over these folks.
It's only a professional relationship that you have.
And these people were military professionals, and they respected that I was a two-star general.
And usually...
you know, they went along in a cooperative manner, but sometimes we would be at odds on things.
And, you know, the only real control you have is this professional relationship, and there was one other thing.
Each of the services had an agreement they'd signed with the A&M to have these programs here, and they were very old, not very up to date at all, but
In there, it does say that the university can terminate these people really with very little notice for a reason.
So I had the authority to terminate them if our disagreement was such, but I always said that that wouldn't happen except in real unusual circumstances.
But again, the problem to me was that I didn't have any
any input into their service rating.
I didn't have anything to do with their pay and salary.
And, you know, I had to kind of ask a lot of time.
You don't give directions very firmly or these people will object to that, sometimes may object to it.